Let's open up in prayer.

Father, thank you for this time.

We pray, Lord, that you would help us now to have our hearts and minds attuned, Lord,

not only to your word and the wisdom which it gives us, but to Christ our Savior.

Father, we pray that insofar as we think through components of the sixth commandment this morning,

that we would do so in such a way that honors Christ our Savior, Christ who gave his life for us,

and in whom we now live.

We pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.

Well, we are continuing through our study of Christian ethics, and we have been over the last two and a half months, three months actually, thinking through the Sixth Commandment, thou shalt not murder, and different ethical aspects of that.

The last month we've looked at suicide, we've looked at euthanasia, we've looked at a number

of different aspects on that abortion.

And what I want to look at this morning, and I'm going to be taking this from Wayne Grudem's

Christian ethics book here, is on aging and death.

How do we as Christians think through aging and death?

Grudem says this, "As we grow older, it is inevitable that our bodies will grow weaker."

This is true even for champion athletes.

No athlete has ever failed to retire from the most competitive skill levels of professional sports.

In the midst of our lives, we begin to experience increasingly frequent reminders that death is eventually coming.

Modern Western culture seeks to avoid thinking about aging and death.

Some people put immense amounts of money and time into attempts to hide the signs of aging

and to appear younger than they really are.

How should Christians approach this phase of life?

There's a host of questions that might pop up when we think through the ethics of aging and dying.

What questions do you think might pop up with this issue?

Yeah, that's right.

So one question might present itself.

Should Christians think about this more?

So should they worry about it if we know the Lord,

knowing that in Christ we have his resurrection is our resurrection

and we will be resurrected to everlasting life?

What other questions might pop up?

Yeah.

Who should be allowed to age or be helped along to death?

Say that one more time.

Who should be allowed to age or be helped along to death?

Who should be allowed to age?

Can you unpack that?

I have seen articles, having a special needs child, my eyes catch articles that often talk about like a child who is born with traumatic, or not traumatic, but like debilitating conditions in which they, their quality of life will be significantly affected.

And I have seen comments from people in the bottom of their article saying, well, maybe they should just gently be helped along.

Because what kind of life could they possibly lead?

Yeah, so an argument for euthanasia is what they're making.

An argument for euthanasia.

Right, right. In other words, when it comes to the ethics of aging from a Christian worldview, you would say, no, no, no, all life is valuable, no matter the ability.

Right.

And so we should help.

But that is not, I'm finding it more and more that that's coming into question.

Yeah.

Not by Christians, but by the broader culture.

in a way that I

that I think has even changed

in my lifetime in the last

40 years. Yeah, I think that's right.

Anyone else? Other questions

that might arise when it comes to

the ethics of aging? Did I see

a hand over there? Yes, sir?

The cost of

aging, keeping people alive

how much

money are you willing to spend

to extend your life?

It can, yeah.

And if you were here three weeks ago, we attacked that a little bit, especially when it comes to, you know, you're in an accident.

And it costs a good bit of money to kind of keep life support going.

What are the ethics of continuing that?

Is there a moral issue with ending that?

So I'll just point you to the YouTube channel and you can follow it there.

But that's right.

That's a very good question to think through.

We'll think through some of those and some other ones as well.

First, let's begin with some rudimentary truths.

Aging and death are a result of sin.

Death is a reality precisely because sin is a part of our now fallen world.

Remember Adam and Eve.

God says to Adam, in the day that you eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall surely die.

And through the temptation of Satan, Eve and Adam eat and immediately introduce into the world spiritual death, which culminates and and fruition's into physical death.

And indeed, there is eternal death.

Romans 5, 12 sin came into the world through one man and death through sin.

And so death spread to all men because all sinned.

At least one component of thinking through death is just realizing that this is not the way it was supposed to be.

We were created unto life.

And death only exists because of our sin.

Death only exists because of our sin.

Again, 1 Corinthians 15.

For as by one man came death, by a man has come also the resurrection of the dead.

For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive.

God warned Adam that he would impose the penalty of death in the case of disobedience.

And that's what ensued.

However, the penalty of death was not imposed instantly when Adam and Eve sinned.

Instead, they experienced it gradually as they began to age and eventually grew old and then died.

It is interesting to think through, isn't it, the longevity of life before they died,

at least in those early generations, reading some up to 900 years or so.

But nonetheless, death ensued.

Does that mean that death is a punishment for Christians?

Because even as Christians, we will die.

Yes.

Yes, that's right.

Yep, yep, yep.

So we've been promised in Christ eternal life.

And yet, even though we have life in Christ, the reality is that we still die.

I want to ask in a second why that is.

Why is it that we still die?

But I guess one way I'm getting at that question is, is death a punishment for us as Christians?

John?

I was going to say to an extent, yes, because we're still sinful in the same way Adam and Eve were sinful.

So, yes.

And it's not like we don't deserve death.

Like, it's not as though God has given us something that we don't deserve.

Yeah, yeah.

Anyone else?

Anyone want to answer in the negative?

What do we do with verses like Romans 8, 1?

There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.

That Christ has, you know, as we sing, paid it all.

Are we to think through death as a still existing punishment for us?

Mazak?

I mean, there's no more sting in death.

Yeah, that's right.

So in one sense, it could be considered punishment.

In another sense, it could, you know, because we have the hope of, you know, being with Christ afterwards.

So it's a reminder of the sin that caused having Christ having to be crucified.

That's right.

you alluded to quoted 1 Corinthians 15.

Let me read part of it here.

Then comes the end when he delivers the kingdom of God,

when he delivers the kingdom to God the Father

after destroying every rule and every authority and power

for he must reign until he has put all his enemies

under his feet.

The last enemy to be destroyed is death.

When Christ returns, then shall come to pass

the saying that is written,

death is swallowed up in victory.

O death, where is your victory?

O death, where is your sting?

I think rather than seeing death as a punishment for Christians,

it is the just punishment for all sinners.

But insofar as we've given our lives to Christ and been forgiven of all our sin,

the punishment has been paid.

In other words, the gospel tells us that he died for our punishment.

And therefore, there's not more punishment to come.

In his death, all of it has been totally paid for.

And yet, I think the reality is that the life that we now have,

he's installed it in a now and not yet reality.

There is still the process of aging and dying, even for Christians.

Now, not as punishment, not as judgment and condemnation, I would argue probably for sanctification,

but it's delayed the actual physical death.

And yet, interestingly, what does Paul refer, how does Paul refer to death when he's speaking

to Christians throughout the New Testament?

Isn't it strange that he always refers to it as falling asleep?

sleep.

Why?

Because

in the final

resurrection,

bodies will be raised to new life.

Body and soul

brought back together, and we

will live forever.

Death for the Christian

is not an

everlasting reality.

Death for the unbeliever is

an everlasting reality.

But for the Christian, life

Eternal life is our reality.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah, God always seems to apply the benefits of salvation in this now and not yet kind of process.

And I like what Grudem says here.

God uses their, therefore, the experiences of aging and death to complete our sanctification.

Christians never have to pay any penalty for sin, for that has all been taken by Christ.

Therefore, when we do experience pain and suffering in this life, we should never think it is because God is punishing us for our harm.

Sometimes suffering is simply a result of living in a sinful fallen world, but sometimes God is disciplining us for our good through suffering.

And sometimes he is allowing us to experience hardship as an opportunity to express our faith in him and find our joy in him.

In all cases, Romans 8.28 assures us that for those who love God, all things work together for good for those who are called according to his purpose.

And I would say even aging and death.

Yeah, Doug.

If there's no death for Christians, then how are you going to be a martyr?

Well, there's no lasting death for Christians.

Oh, I see what you're saying.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Someone has to be a martyr.

That's right.

If I can't die, then I can't be a martyr.

Correct.

Yeah, that's another way of looking at it.

Someone read for me James 1, verses 2 through 3.

James 1, verses 2 through 3.

Great passage.

James 1, 2, 3.

Yep.

Count it all joy, my brothers, when you meet trials of various kinds,

for you know that the testing of your faith produces steadfastness.

Yeah.

Go ahead, one more verse.

And let steadfastness have its full effect,

that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.

Yeah, that's right.

Our sanctification takes time.

God could have sent Christ to die for our sins

and then the moment we believe in him

we have the fullness of eternal life

the fullness of a glorified body

but that's not the way in which he's set it up

we are to pick up our cross and follow him

even unto death and perhaps that even means martyrdom

but I think he's done that so as to bring about the sanctifying process so that we might through

the hardships of this fallen world be more and more conformed into the image of our savior dying unto

self outwardly even so that internally and spiritually we are growing in life and in Christ

likeness. The challenge

that Jesus gives to the church in Smyrna could be given to every believer.

Be faithful unto death and I will give you the crown of

life. Revelation 2.10. Paul says his goal in

life is that he may become like Christ. I desire that I may know him

and the power of his resurrection and may share his sufferings becoming

like him in his death.

following not just the model of our Savior,

but the way in which we rely more and more upon God.

As Christ came, ministered,

he knew that the cross was the end goal,

and then the resurrection, then glory.

That entire time he models perfect faithfulness.

How?

He's reliant upon the Father in every regard.

And I think now, by belief in him and being unified to him,

we walk in that same model.

Reliant upon God the Father, even unto death.

And then comes glory.

Then comes glory.

Jesus is perfect.

Yeah.

He is perfect.

Paul could say this in Philippians chapter 1 verse 20.

It is my eager expectation and hope that I will not be at all ashamed, but that with full courage now as always, Christ will be honored in my body, whether by life or by death.

Grudem says this, this understanding of aging and death should be a great encouragement to us.

It should take away from us the fear of growing old and dying, a fear that haunts the minds of unbelievers especially.

Nevertheless, although God will bring good to us through this process,

we must still remember that aging and death are not natural.

They're not right.

And because of sin, they mar the perfect creation that God originally made.

Death, as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 15, death is an enemy,

something that Christ will finally destroy.

So, we still hate death.

We don't fear it.

We don't see it as God's punishment against us.

In fact, God uses aging and the dying process for our good and sanctification.

But it also, I think, creates in us a kind of longing and hope.

A world where this reality of death will no longer be.

There will come a time after the resurrection, after our entrance into glory.

Like, we probably won't even have to use lotion.

Our skin will always be renewed, never dry and dying.

Life will constantly and continually, like C.S. Lewis in the last battle,

further up and further in, be perfect, joyful life, life eternal.

But until that day, well, I hope you use your lotion,

But I hope you also long for the coming of Christ.

Grudem says this, our experience of death completes our union with Christ.

It's an interesting aspect to this.

Another reason why God allows us to experience death rather than taking us immediately to heaven when we become Christians

is that through death we imitate Christ and what he did and thereby experience closer union with him.

Paul can say that we are fellow heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him, in order that we may also be glorified with him.

Romans 8, verse 17.

Peter goes after the same thing.

He tells his readers not to be surprised at the fiery testing that comes on them, but encourages them.

1 Peter 4, verse 13.

Rejoice insofar as you share Christ's sufferings, that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed.

Union with Christ in suffering includes union with him in death.

In other words, the servant is not greater than the master.

And if the master has entered into glory through death,

so it will be for all those who are now one with Christ.

We enter into glory through death.

If God uses the experience of death to deepen our trust in him

and to strengthen our obedience to him,

Well then, how does that help us think through preserving our life in contrast sometimes to obeying God's commands?

Life is good.

We hate death.

but sometimes

in the messiness

and ethical conundrums of this

fallen world

sometimes

obeying God means

that it will be a death sentence for us

how do we

think through that? What issues might come up

that might arise?

Yeah

Okay.

Okay.

I would make a distinction that for Christians, he can use this for disciplining us.

Yeah, but that's different than punishment.

Discipline is different than punishment.

Discipline is given out of love so as to bring somebody closer to God and bring them to repentance.

But punishment is a condemnation of guilty, guilty, guilty.

In Christ, we are no longer guilty but counted righteous.

Paul says this in Acts 21, 13.

I am ready not only to be imprisoned, but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

In other words, he knows he's called to preach.

And doing so might bring about his death earlier than he would so wish.

But he's committed to saying, it doesn't matter.

My highest calling is to be obedient to God, obedient to Christ, no matter what comes.

I think that's a good model when we come to this issue of death.

Are we willing, even if it costs us our life, to do the hard thing but the obedient thing in serving our Savior?

It's easy to say, easy to preach, hard to do, but good to think through and pray about.

Lord, if that ever comes, if that's a part of my path, help me, like Paul, to be obedient rather than fear death.

Paul says this in Acts 20, and he said this to the Ephesian elders,

I do not account my life of any value, nor is precious to myself,

if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I receive from the Lord Jesus,

to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.

Keith, you became more convinced during COVID

that even within the church,

Christians were kind of getting this emphasis wrong.

We were treasuring life

more than fearing God.

Is that right?

How did you put it?

Yeah.

I think the title was

Dear Christian, Why Are You Afraid to Die?

That's right.

And I think it became obvious that our fear of death had kind of overridden our love of gathering with God's people,

our love of hearing the word preached, our love of the means of grace.

And, you know, there's a lot of nuance there.

you know, the goodness of thinking wisely, especially at the beginning when a lot of things

are unknown. But as more and more things became unknown, became known during the pandemic,

it became more and more clear in my mind that there was a lot of fear of death that was

governing our decisions. Yeah, yeah, that's right. And that's good too, thinking through,

you know, the command to gather and worship.

And you're right, there were a lot of nuances.

And sometimes it's okay to say, hey, you know,

there's a literal plague, and you're certainly going to die

if you gather together, then all right,

maybe we'll figure something else out for the time being.

But it became more and more clear.

No, I mean, you can gather for other things,

and other places remained open.

Churches, at least here in PG County,

don't open up, don't gather, you'll die.

But Maryland Live, that's okay.

So the elders thought, all right,

maybe we should get some slot machines in church

so that we could stay open.

That's sarcasm.

That was sarcasm, yeah.

For the YouTube video, that was sarcasm.

But the bigger question was,

well, all right, no, let's meet to worship

because this is commanded and this is good.

And there was a lot of apprehension.

And I think it was good to think through,

hey, there is spiritual life in gathering

to hear the word preached and fellowship together.

And of course, yeah, if you're of a certain age bracket

where this is particularly nasty to you,

stay home, we'll visit you when we can

and keep distant.

But if that's not you,

come, worship.

This is good.

There's spiritual life here.

Yeah.

That's right.

Yes.

Death does bring us closer to Christ.

Death brings us closer to Christ.

I was talking with my sister-in-law last night.

She's a nurse.

And she was saying how busy the chaplains in the hospitals are.

Because people who, you know, their whole lives aren't even religious,

now are faced with the reality that this is the end.

And they're asking for somebody to talk to about these things.

And so they always have a chaplain there at the hospital.

And the chaplain is consistently busy because the fear of death puts eternity on your mind.

And I think for the Christian, that nearness of death makes us cling to and trust in Christ even more.

This is, I think, a blessing that comes with aging.

It's an opportunity for greater trust in Christ.

and even effectiveness in ministry and ordinary conduct in life.

Yeah, Harold.

I think about personal experience.

I was with both of my parents in their lives.

And you could almost see acceptance and death.

Yep.

And no fear.

Yeah.

They both passed with a smile on their face.

Were they believers?

Yes.

Amen.

And I think about my wife's experience.

She cares for the elderly.

And she has been with many people when they died.

And she saw the same thing.

even people who appeared to fear death early on,

when they got to that moment of death,

there appeared to be no fear.

- Yeah, yeah, yeah.

You find that often in the accounts of martyrs

that they're terrified and you know,

they're in prison cells for the month before

and then the day of their execution arrives

And they marched boldly, singing hymns and psalms and giving the gospel.

Keith read an account, I think, from John Knox's history of the Reformation in Scotland,

where there was one guy who everyone had been arrested, he was going to be executed.

And everyone bet, even his close family members, he's going to give in, he's going to recant.

He's just got a weak condition.

And as they marched him to the stake to be burned alive, he boldly started preaching the gospel.

There's something about the Christian as he nears that moment of seeing his Lord face to face that the Spirit uses to put a spine in him and go confident and with hope.

Now, is that always the case?

No.

No.

You know, I've been a pastor long enough where I'm talking to somebody who I know, as far as I can judge their heart, I know they're going to be with the Lord.

I'm not God.

I can't make an omniscient call on this.

But by all accounts, they confess Christ.

They've pursued holiness.

They've tried to put sin to death.

They've been a part of the church.

And they actually have no hope and assurance at all.

And they go into the process of death absolutely terrified.

And I count it one of the greatest blessings and privileges to be able to try and walk with them

as they cross the Jordan into the celestial city.

You remember John Bunyan, the Pilgrim's Progress?

And as he nears the celestial city, he has to go through that Jordan River.

And what begins to happen?

He begins to drown.

Why?

Because he's afraid.

And his eyes are taken off of Christ.

And he thinks, oh, this is it, this is it, I'm not real.

And I always cry when I read this point.

What happens?

Christ reaches in and grabs him out and brings him home to glory.

But a lot of people go through that experience with a lack of assurance.

And so, you know, this is a class on ethics.

If I spin it this way.

One way is not more righteous than the other.

How we enter into death.

And sometimes the Lord in his providence allows these kind of terrifying moments.

I guess just keep this Sunday school in the back of your mind.

If you're in Christ, there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.

Paul, remember, experienced extreme weakness,

writes about a thorn in his flesh in 2 Corinthians.

He doesn't give further explanation of it,

but he says that he asked God three times to remove it.

And instead of removing the thorn, God answered,

my grace is sufficient for you

my power is made perfect

in weakness

Paul concluded

therefore I will boast

all the more gladly of my weaknesses

so that the power of Christ

may rest upon me

for the sake of Christ then says Paul

I am content with weaknesses

insults, hardships, persecutions

calamities for when I am weak

then I am strong

apply that to aging

generally speaking

there is a decrease in strength

and an increase in weakness

physically

perhaps emotionally

the aging process

as it causes our bodies to become weaker

provides

therefore at least for Christians

an opportunity to make the strength

of God more evident

more evident

I have told this story a million times

a pastor friend of mine, a retired pastor

he's now in his 90's

and so he's weak

he needs a walker

his sight is not there anymore

and

can I be praying about for you?

It's usually two things. The first is

and this blows my mind

at 91 years old

help me to keep fighting sin. I want to

run the race well.

Fight temptation.

And the second one is

as I grow weaker

that Christ would

be made strong in my life.

And he means that ministerially.

He wants

he lives in assisted living

and he wants the people who are there

to see Christ in him as he ages well, as he ages well.

There is that temptation from Satan,

especially as you begin to age and you can't preach anymore

and you can't do the ministries that you used to do.

Perhaps all you can do is pray.

Well, one, that's huge.

Do more of that.

But secondly, perhaps your very life itself, the way in which you are aging and the way in which you approach death, you're being watched.

You're being watched by other Christians.

And it's a massive ministry to see a mature, godly man or woman go through that process as Christ is made strong in you.

Paul faced numerous difficulties and hardships

including some measure of increased weakness in his body

he said 2 Corinthians 4.16

our outer self is wasting away

yet he wasn't discouraged

he writes this remarkable statement in 2 Corinthians 4

2 Corinthians 4.16

we do not lose heart

though our outer self is

wasting away our inner

self is being renewed day by day

for this light momentary affliction

is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory

beyond all comparison

as we look not to the things that are seen

but to the things that are unseen

for the things that are seen are transient

but the things that are unseen

are eternal

is outer

dying

matched equally by an internal reviving revived at the moment of being born again

but then sanctified and and and and brought closer and closer to the life of

Christ spiritually speaking but he links the two together though our outer self is

wasting away our inner self is being renewed day by day this light momentary

affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison.

The Lord has allowed us to age, to enter into that ultimate weakness of death, so as to

prepare us for glory.

How wonderful, how confidence-inducing I think that is.

I think if we take that to heart,

think of the prospect of growing older,

I think it should encourage us.

What kind of life will I live as I age more and more?

Yep.

Yep.

As our bodies grow older,

surprise, surprise, it shows.

Physically speaking, we look older.

And it's almost true of all of us that at age 16, 17, it's inconceivable.

Then by age 40, it's very conceivable.

And then after that, you hardly remember 16, 17, 18.

As our bodies grow older, show numerous physical signs of aging, loss of strength, loss of eyesight, graying hair.

My daughter this morning said, Daddy, your beard is getting awfully gray.

Well, here's one blessing in that.

Proverbs 20, verse 29.

Who of us who are over 40 know that by heart?

The glory of young men is their strength, but the splendor of old men is their gray hair.

It's the splendor and glory of age to have gray hair.

Why?

What is the Proverbs getting at?

Experience.

Yeah.

You've made it.

The big dichotomy in Proverbs is live a wise life or live a foolish life.

If you live a foolish life, what kind of life will that be other than foolish?

Short.

Short.

Foolish people do stupid things that end their life quickly.

There's consequences.

Therefore, if you're wise, generally speaking, this is Proverbs, not a math equation,

you will have a long, prosperous, flourishing life.

And the evidence of that, the splendor of that is,

oh, look, you've got gray hair.

You've made it.

You've seen some things.

You've made it through the hard trials.

And you're still going.

I love this footnote from the ESV study Bible on that proverb.

Gray hair is a concrete example of a general truth.

Many of the physical evidences of old age have a dignity and splendor of their own,

Often representing experience, maturity, wisdom, and holiness.

That's why a synonym for a pastor is elder.

You want somebody who is experienced.

They have some time under their belt.

There's life that they've lived and some battles against the evil one that they've fought in.

there's been continued reliance upon Christ

and they've made it

they've not been taken out

still there are some difficulties

as splendid and glorious as gray hair is

there are difficulties

and

many of those are physical

many of those are spiritual

and some of those are ethical conundrums.

So, in the last 15 minutes here,

let's have a fun ethics discussion.

Should Christians use hair dye

to cover up the effects of aging?

All right, we've got a solid no.

Oh, there it is.

There's a great distinction.

should you or could you you want to unpack that for us

i mean you can i don't think it's necessarily it could be a sin if your heart's convicted of it if

it's if it's a vanity thing where it's inside your heart it could be sin but it couldn't it

doesn't necessarily have to be for everybody it could be permissible yeah but it might not be

beneficial for you yeah that's right yeah so let's not fall into the trap of making our internal

conscience is the moral compass for all other people. I think this does fall under a wisdom

issue aspect. And I think, yeah, Justin, you're right. It could be sinful, but not necessarily.

Dan? It seems like it's similar to many of the other ways in which we try and look good

through getting haircuts or dressing well or exercising or shaving or something.

That's right.

Yeah.

And so it could have the same thing where in some ways maybe those are sinful.

If you spend all your money on clothes because you just want to look good, then that's probably sinful.

But if you, I don't know, there's a balance there or something.

Yeah, there is a balance.

That's good.

There's a couple of ways to come at this, I think.

Go ahead, Justin.

You want to?

I shaved my head because I have a ridiculous hairline.

Oh, yeah, we know.

Yes.

That's kind of the same, but that's vanity for me for sure.

Right, right.

Yeah.

We mitigate, and I think we're allowed to mitigate, the effects of the fall.

Right, so think through some of the judgments that incurred as a result of Adam and Eve's sin.

Women, pain and childbearing.

We haven't quite gotten to it yet, but I would argue it's not sinful to have pain-reducing medication in your pregnancy when you're giving birth.

This is not something Christians need to say, oh, no, no, God said we're going to have pain and childbearing.

Therefore, put a stick between your teeth, hold your husband's hand until he screams and push through it.

No, it's okay to have medication.

Think through the other result of the fall.

Thorns and thistles.

The Garden of Eden is taken over by thorns and thistles.

I mowed my lawn yesterday.

Am I going against God's judgment by raking and cutting and mowing and pushing back the effects of the fall in my little Eden of my front yard and backyard?

I would say no.

It's not sinful to mow my lawn and keep it neat.

And therefore, I think if we think through that category, yeah, okay.

Ladies, if you want to color your hair, go for it.

If you don't, great.

Amen.

Again, splendid, glorious crown of gray hair.

If you want to shave, go for it.

If you don't, that's great.

But let's up the any.

Cosmetic surgery.

Do any surgeons have any Christian ethical takes on this?

I think it goes right back to what Justin said.

It's a matter of the heart.

Yeah.

And what the, you know, what do you treasure most?

Yeah.

Yeah.

The Lord is beautiful.

He is beauty himself.

Delights in beauty and has made things beautiful.

And yet, as a result of the fall, beauty is sometimes deformed.

I would argue, you know, corrective surgery.

Parents are not sinning.

They're not in the wrong if, you know, you give birth and there's some kind of facial deformity with your child.

Okay, we can do reconstructive surgery.

great there's nothing vain there or how about for yourself later in life braces

finally my parents never got me braces I've got my job I've got insurance I'm

gonna get braces to fix crooked teeth might be vain but it might not be it might

just be hey I enjoy straight teeth and I'd like to spend the money to get straight

teeth. But then we also have aspects of what Paul says in 1 Timothy and Peter says this in 1 Peter

3. Do not let your adorning be external, the braiding of hair and the putting on of gold jewelry

or the clothing you wear, but let your adorning be the hidden person of the heart with the

imperishable beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which in God's sight is very precious. For this

is how the holy women who hoped in God used to adorn themselves by submitting to their own husbands

as Sarah obeyed Abraham calling him Lord and you are her children if you do good and do not fear

anything that is frightening. I don't think he's calling out braided hair is sinful or gold jewelry

but it's a matter of the heart and insofar as you are desiring those external things over and above

an internal spiritual delight in obeying Christ and being godly,

well, then you've got it wrong.

You've lost the plot.

Now, here Peter's saying, pursue godliness as that inner truer beauty

than covering it up with makeup on the outside,

whether that be actual makeup or braided hair or gold jewelry.

yes always always

um all right we'll end there and we'll pick up next week on uh thinking through our own death

and how we can prepare for our own death.

Oh, here we go.

Keith Kaufman.

Oh, Christian, why are you afraid to die?

We'll hand out copies of that.

If you want one, it's right here.

Let's pray.

Father, thank you for this time.

And we pray, Lord, that you would help us to live well.

But Lord, we also pray that you would help us to die well.

As you have allowed us to age and to approach physical death,

Father, we pray that we would make Christ known in how we do that.

We would rely upon him.

We pray this in Jesus' name.

Amen.

